============
Hook Scripts
============

virtualenvwrapper adds several hook points you can use to change your
settings, shell environment, or other configuration values when
creating, deleting, or moving between environments. They are either
*sourced* (allowing them to modify your shell environment) or *run* as
an external program at the appropriate trigger time.

Environment Hooks
=================

postactivate
------------

The ``$VIRTUAL_ENV/bin/postactivate`` script is sourced after the new
environment is enabled. ``$VIRTUAL_ENV`` refers to the new environment
at the time the script runs.

This example script for the PyMOTW environment changes the current
working directory and the PATH variable to refer to the source tree
containing the PyMOTW source.

::

    pymotw_root=/Users/dhellmann/Documents/PyMOTW
    cd $pymotw_root
    PATH=$pymotw_root/bin:$PATH

predeactivate
-------------

The ``$VIRTUAL_ENV/bin/predeactivate`` script is sourced before the
current environment is deactivated, and can be used to disable or
clear settings in your environment. ``$VIRTUAL_ENV`` refers to the old
environment at the time the script runs.

Global Hooks
============

postactivate
------------

The global ``$WORKON_HOME/postactivate`` script is sourced after the
new environment is enabled and the new environment's postactivate is
sourced (if it exists). ``$VIRTUAL_ENV`` refers to the new environment
at the time the script runs.

This example script adds a space between the virtual environment name
and your old PS1 by making use of ``_OLD_VIRTUAL_PS1``.

::

    PS1="(`basename \"$VIRTUAL_ENV\"`) $_OLD_VIRTUAL_PS1"

premkvirtualenv
---------------

The ``$WORKON_HOME/premkvirtualenv`` script is run as an external
program after the virtual environment is created but before the
current environment is switched to point to the new env. The current
working directory for the script is ``$WORKON_HOME`` and the name of
the new environment is passed as an argument to the script.

postmkvirtualenv
----------------

The ``$WORKON_HOME/postmkvirtualenv`` script is sourced after the new
environment is created and activated.

prermvirtualenv
---------------

The ``$WORKON_HOME/prermvirtualenv`` script is run as an external
program before the environment is removed. The full path to the
environment directory is passed as an argument to the script.

postrmvirtualenv
----------------

The ``$WORKON_HOME/postrmvirtualenv`` script is run as an external
program after the environment is removed. The full path to the
environment directory is passed as an argument to the script.
